An Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is an information processing paradigm that is inspired
by the way biological nervous systems, such as the brain, process information. The key element
of this paradigm is the new structure of the information processing system.It is composed of a
huge number of highly interconnected processing elements (neurons) working together to solve
specific problems.ANNs, like people, learn by example.An ANN is configured for a particular
application, such as pattern recognition or data classification, through a learning process.
Learning in biological systems adds adjustments to the synaptic connections that exist between
the neurons. The ANN has capability to extract the relationship between the inputs and outputs
of a process, without the physics being explicitly provided .Thus, these properties of ANN
are well suited to the problem of weather forecasting.The main purpose is to develop the most
suitable ANN architecture and its associated training technique for weather prediction. This
development will be based on using two different neural network architecture to demonstrate
the suitable one for this application.
Components of a modern weather forecasting system include the following modules:
1. Data Collection Observations of atmospheric pressure, temperature, wind speed, wind
direction, humidity and precipitation are made near the earths surface by trained observers,
automatic weather stations.
2. Data assimilation During the data assimilation process,information gained from the observations
is used in conjunction with a numerical model most recent forecast for the time
that observations were made to produce the meteorological analysis.
3. Numerical Weather Prediction Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) uses the power
of computers to make a forecast. Complex computer programs, also known as forecast
models, run on supercomputers and provide predictions on many atmospheric variables
such as temperature, pressure, wind and rainfall.
A typical neural network consists of layers. In a single layered network there is an input layer of
source nodes and an output layer of neurons. A multi-layer network has in addition one or more
hidden layers. Extra hidden neurons raise the networks ability to extract higher order statistics
from (input) data. Furthermore a network is said to be fully connected if every node in each
layer of the network is connected to every other node in the adjacent forward layer .The network
learns by adjusting the interconnections (called weights) between layers. When the network is
adequately trained, it is able to generalize relevant output for a set of input data. A valuable
property of neural networks is that of generalization, whereby a trained neural network is able
to provide a correct matching in the form of output data for a set of previously unseen input
data.we are using Back Propagation Neural Network with one hidden layer.
