Global weather pattern affecting local weather condition:
Global wind patterns affects air masses movement in local atmosphere. An air mass is a huge
body of air which has similar temperature, humidity, and air pressure throughout the region of
atmosphere. Air masses are classified mainly by two characteristics i.e. temperature and humidity
which it gets from the area where it forms. Jet stream is another global factor which
influence global weather pattern. Jet stream is fast flowing stream of air present 12Km above
the earths surface. It is formed at adjacent boundaries of two air masses which have significant
different temperatures.
Figure 1: Influence of Jet Stream
The ENSO is the cycle of warm and cold sea surface temperature (SST) of the tropical central
and eastern Pacific Ocean, where El Nino and La Nina are opposite phases of ENSO (El Nino-
Southern Oscillation) cycle. The ENSO cycle is a scientific term that describes the fluctuations
in temperature between the ocean and atmosphere in the east-central Equatorial Pacific. El Nino
referred as warm phase of ENSO cycle whereas La Nina referred as cold phase of ENSO cycle.
These deviations from normal surface temperatures can have large-scale impacts not only on
ocean processes, but also on local weather and climate.
The term El Nio refers to the large-scale ocean-atmosphere climate interaction connected to
an occasional warming in ocean surface temperatures over the focal and east-focal Equatorial
Pacific. Ordinary El Nio impacts are probably going to create over North America amid the
forthcoming winter season. Those incorporate hotter than-normal temperatures over western
and focal Canada, and over the western and northern United States. The presence of El Nio can
altogether weather patterns, sea conditions, and marine fisheries crosswise over vast parts of the
globe for an all-encompassing time frame.
La Nina represents periods of below-average sea surface temperature across the east-central
Equatorial Pacific. Worldwide atmosphere La Nina impacts will in general be inverse those of
El Nina impacts. In the tropics, ocean temperature varieties in La Nina likewise will in general
be inverse those of El Nino. Amid a La Nina year, winter temperatures are hotter than typical
in the Southeast and cooler than ordinary in the Northwest.
