1. Select Data
The first thing to do is to select appropriate relevant data that carries the most of the
systems dynamics we want the neural network to reproduce. In our case we need to
select data that are relevant for weather forecasting. We have collected data from various
sources like:
 www.data.gov.in
 (http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/)
 www.kaggle.com , etc.
2. Preprocessing Data
Raw data collected from a data source usually present different particularities, such as
data range, sampling and category. Some variables are result from measurements while
others are summary or even calculated. Preprocessing means to adapt these variables
value to a form neural networks can handle properly.

(a) Problems in Dataset
 Something changed in the middle of data collection: The most common
issues are that the data hasn’t actually been collected for the task you are being
asked to do. And it had been asked to make the data validate an outcome which
has already been decided.
 Excel butchery: Operational errors that are been made while handling datasets.
 Date/time mismatch: There’s a date and a timestamp recorded, but that timestamp
did not happen during that date.
 Text field formatting: If its a JSON or text field, there’s almost always a few
rows in which there’s a missing quote or closing curly brace, and then import
procedures die a sad, sad death.
 Undocumented missing data codes: Sometimes when data isn’t collected, a
missing data code is entered, usually a value that the data can’t take on in real
life.
 Confusing column names: Yet another case of ”why does no one document
their data?”
(b) Cleaning of Datasets
Data cleaning involve different techniques based on the problem and the data type.
Different methods can be applied with each has its own trade-offs. Overall, incorrect
data is either removed, corrected, or imputed.
 Irrelevant data: Irrelevant data are those that are not actually needed, and dont
fit under the context of the problem were trying to solve.
 Duplicates: Duplicates are data points that are repeated in your dataset. A common
symptom is when two users have the same identity number. Or, the same
article was scrapped twice. And therefore, they simply should be removed.
 Syntax errors: Remove white spaces: Extra white spaces at the beginning or
the end of a string should be removed.
 Pad strings: Strings can be padded with spaces or other characters to a certain
width.
 Fix typos: Strings can be entered in many different ways, and no wonder, can
have mistakes.
 Standardize: Our duty is to not only recognize the typos but also put each
value in the same standardized format. For strings, make sure all values are
either in lower or upper case. For numerical values, make sure all values have
a certain measurement unit.
 Scaling / Transformation: Scaling means to transform your data so that it fits
within a specific scale, such as 0100 or 01.
 Missing values: Given the fact the missing values are unavoidable leaves one
with the question of what to do when one encounters them. Ignoring the missing
data is the same as digging holes in a boat; It will sink.
(c) Normalisation
Normalization is the process to get all the variables into the same data range, usually
with smaller values, between 0 and 1 or -1 and 1. This helps the neural network to
present values within the variable zone in activation functions such as sigmoid or
hyperbolic tangent.
Values too high or too low may drive neurons to produce values that are too high or
too low as well for the activation functions, therefore leading the derivative for these
neurons to be too small, near zero.
The normalization should consider a predefined range of the dataset. It is performed
right away:
where Nmin and Nmax represent the normalized minimum and maximum limits,
Xmin and Xmax denote X variables minimum and maximum limits,
X indicates the original value, and
Xnorm refers to the normalized value.
If we want the normalization to be between 0 and 1, for example, the equation is
simplified as follows:
By applying the normalization, a new normalized dataset is produced and is fed to
the neural network. One should also take into account that a neural network fed with
normalized values will be trained to produce normalized values on the output, so the
inverse (denormalization) process becomes necessary as well.
3. Implementation
For the implementation part, we are using Java programming language. In addition, we
had to add two components to the project:
 Chart
Charts can be drawn in Java by using the freely available package JFreeChart (http :
==www:jfree:org=jfreechart=). This package is attached with this chapters source
code. So, we designed a class called Chart. It implements methods basically
for plotting data series by making calls to natively implemented methods of the
JFreeChart classes.
 Handling data files
To work with data files, we had to implement a class called Data. It currently performs
reads from the so-called CSV format, which is suitable for data import and
export. This class also performs preprocessing on the data by means of normalization.

4. Build a neural network
To forecast weather, we collected daily data from various sources. The neural network
was trained to forecast the average temperature. So, the structure of the neural network is
shown in the following figure:
Figure 5: Structure of Neural Network
Here, the network is trained, and then, the charts of the error are plotted.
The following factors will affect the performance of our Artificial Neural Network Model:-
 No. of Neurons/Layer
 No. of Samples
 Transfer Function for Hidden Layers
 No. of Hidden Layers
 Overfitting
Giving life to a neuron- Activation function
Th neuron’s output is given by an activation function. This component adds non-linearity
to neural network processing , which is needed because the natural neuron has non-linear
behaviors. An activation function is usually bounded between two values at the output,
therefore being a non-linear function, but in some special cases, it can be linear function.
